# 3.0 Terminal Input and Output


## Terminal Output

So far we've covered some basic screen output using print(). But there are some more details worth knowing. One is 
that the print() statement can take some optional additional arguments. The *sep* argument (short for separator) 
specifies what separator you want to use if you put multiple items in a print statement. The default is a space, which
is what happens if you don't use the separator argument.
```python

x = "dog"
y = "cat"
print(x, y, sep=',')  # output will be "dog,cat" instead of "dog cat"
```

The *end* argument specifies what you want to do at the end of a line when using a print statement. The default is that
a new line is appended to whatever is on your print statement, which is why every print statement generates output on a 
different line. But you can change this if you want.
```python
x = "dog"
y = "cat"
print(x, end="")
print(y)
# the result of this will be a single line of output, dogcat
```

One thing to note is that when the default '\n' is used in a print statement, this forces the print statement to occur 
immediately by your operating system. But if you change this, you can sometimes see weird behavior, like even having 
print statements occurring out of order, because your operating system decides on its own when to execute them. You can
force it to print right away using *flush*. If you are changing the *end* parameter in a print statement, it is good to 
use *flush* at the same time.
```python
x = "dog"
y = "cat"
print(x, end="", flush=True)
print(y)
# the result of this will be a single line of output, dogcat
```

## Terminal Input

You can get input from the terminal too, using the input() function. Inside the input statement, you put whatever text
prompt you want to print to the screen, and then assign the results to a variable. Whatever is typed into the terminal
before hitting enter will get saved in the variable.
```python
favorite_food = input("Please tell me your favorite food!")
output_string = "Your favorite food is {}? How interesting!".format(favorite_food)
print(output_string)
```

Two things to note about the input() function. The first is that no matter what is typed as input, it is stored as a 
string. So if you want to have numbers as input as use them as numbers, you need to convert them to an int or a float.
The second is that the terminal output that is entered into the input() statement, unlike a print() statement, has no
terminating new line or space. So in the example below a colon and space is at the end so that it looks nicer in the 
terminal when someone types a number.
```python
first_number = input("Please type a number: ")
second_number = input("Please type a number: ")
the_sum = float(first_number) + float(second_number)  # without the float() conversion, this would concatenate strings
print(the_sum)
```


## Deciding Between Multiple Ways of Doing the Same Thing

Note the difference between the print() statements below. There are five different ways to do the same thing: print the 
two strings with a space in between. 

```python
a = "dog"
b = "cat"
c = "dog" + " " + "cat"
d = "{} {}".format(a, b)

print(a, b)
print(a + " " + b)
print(c)
print("{} {}".format(a, b))
print(d)
```

Is one way of doing it better than the others? One of the most general rules of programming is there is no universal 
"right" way to do something, because their all sorts of circumstances that can make what is usually a less efficient 
way better in a particular situation. And so how should you choose? There are some general points to keep in mind.

When you are writing a program, there are a couple of goals you are trying to balance. The first and most obvious is 
that you are trying to create a tool that solves a problem, and usually you want to solve that problem as quickly and
as easily as you can. But there are also some other factors to consider. Let's use another example to make the point:

```python
a = 45
b = 32
c = -2
x = 5
y = 2

print(a * x ** 2 + b * y + c)

z = a * x ** 2 + b * y + c
print(z)
```

In this example, both print statements do the same thing. Is there a reason to prefer one over the other? In situations
like this, it might seem like the first option is preferred because it seems more simple, and is shorter, one line 
instead of two. But in fact most experienced software designers would suggest you do it the second way. 

One general rule of good programming practice, good software engineering, is to make different pieces of code that do 
different things independent. This makes code easier to read, understand, debug, modify, and reuse. In this case, we are 
doing two operations: some math to calculate z, and printing z. Having these be separate lines theoretically makes it 
easier to modify our code later, or find an error, because the two operations are independent. Similarly, what if we 
decide we want to do something with z other than print it? If we decide that, then we need to go back and convert it 
into the second option anyway. As a general rule, keeping code *modular*, meaning keeping different functions and 
operations independent and doing only one thing is a good rule to follow. 

But this "keep things independent" rule is often at odds with writing code quickly. And it can also be at odds with 
writing code clearly, or writing code that executes fast, or uses less memory. This is why the real rule is "there is
no one correct way". In general as you get better at programming you will learn to spot when these trade-offs are in 
conflict and what the right choice is. But for now, it is useful to know about the "keep things independent" principle,
and to follow it when you can.




Next: [3.1. File Output](3.1.%20File%20Output.md)<br>
Previous: [2.9. Homework 1](../CH2/2.9.%20Homework%201.md)
