# 3.1. File Output

Terminal output is very useful for getting information about how our program is working, and for debugging. Terminal 
input is occasionally useful but is not used for often. In the vast majority of Python programs, the way we typically
get input and output is using data files. 

Consider homework 1, for example. It would be really painful to have to manually type in the data from an experiment, 
either into the terminal or into the python script itself. What we want instead is a program that reads in a data file, 
does the calculations, and outputs data to another file. In this section, we will start with learning how to create, 
modify, and write to files.

## Opening Files

In python, before we can read from or write to a file, we need to open the file. What that means in python is 
effectively telling python were the file is (or where it should be created if it doesn't exist), and then telling
python to create a "file object" variable, which includes information like the file's name and location, both in 
the terms we are used to reading (like "/Users/jon/Desktop/my_file.txt") and also in terms of its memory location 
address in terms the computer understands (those hexcode numbers we talked about on day 1). 

In python, these file object data types are typically referred to as "file handles", and so it is common to name the 
variable where we are storing that object something that has that in it. It is a variable, so you can name it anything 
you want (as long as it follows) the python rules for variables), but it is a convention to include file_handle in the
variable name. You want to make sure you remember that the file_handle (the file itself) might be a separate variable
from a string variable where you are keeping track of the file's name or location.

```python
file_path = "~/Desktop/"
file_name = "test_file.txt"
file_handle = open(file_path + file_name)
```

The code above would try to open a file a called "test_file.txt" that is on the Desktop. If that file does not exist,
this line would get an error. In a few weeks we will learn a handy trick to test to see if a file exists before trying
to open it so you don't get this error.

The open() function can take a number of other arguments, that affect the file object that is being created. If no 
arguments are specified, then the file object being created is a "read" object, a file that you are trying to read.
This is why you get an error if the file doesn't exist. But what if you want to create a new file and write to it? Then
you just need to supply an additional argument to the open function, like this:

```python
file_handle = open(file_name, "w")
```

The "w" tells python this is a file you want to write. Python will therefore create a file with that name. Two things to
remember:
- if you only specify a name (as in the example immediately above), and do not supply a full path (as in the first
        example), then the file will be created in the same location as the python script that is running that line
        of code.
- the "w" command creates and write a file with that name, even if there is already a file with that name. It will 
    overwrite any existing file with that name. So be careful not to accidentally overwrite a file you don't want to 
    erase! There are some alternatives to avoid this, noted below
    
There are a number of other options you can use instead of "w".
```python
file_handle = open(file_name, "r")  # opens a file for reading, the default if no option is specified
file_handle = open(file_name, "x")  # opens a file only if the file does not exist, and gives an error if it does
file_handle = open(file_name, "a")  # Creates new file if none exists; opens existing file to append to it if one does 
```

## Writing to Files

Writing to files is a lot like using the print() statement, except the output ends up in the file instead of in the 
terminal. 

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
file_name = "favorite_food.txt"
file_handle = open(file_name)
file_handle.write(favorite_food)
```

There are a couple of differences between the .write() method and the print() function. Remember that print() 
automatically inserts a '\n' at the end of whatever it is told to print. The .write() method doesn't do that. So if 
you want to write multiple lines to a file, you need to insert those line breaks yourself. In the code below, the 
output to the terminal and in the file would look the same.

```python
favorite_food_list = ['pizza', 'ice cream', 'strawberries']
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for food in favorite_food_list:
    print(food)
    file_handle.write(food + "\n")
```

Other than that, print() and .write() are pretty much the same. You can do all the same string formatting that you 
might do in a print() statement in a .write() statement.

```python
number_list = [3.2332523, 5.1231241, 6.1241]
food_list = ['pizza', 'ice cream', 'strawberries']
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for i in range(len(food_list)):
    file_handle.write("{}: {:0.3f}\n".format(food_list[i], number_list[i]))
```

Of course, if we follow our "keep different operations separate" principle, we may want to split that write statement
into two lines:

```python
number_list = [3.2332523, 5.1231241, 6.1241]
food_list = ['pizza', 'ice cream', 'strawberries']
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for i in range(len(food_list)):
    output_string = "{}: {:0.3f}\n".format(food_list[i], number_list[i])
    file_handle.write(output_string)
```

## Closing a file

When you are done working with a file, you should close the file. This is especially important if you are going to be
working with multiple files and re-using the file_handle variable name (like in a loop). If you don't, you might end
up accidentally writing to the wrong file. And if your program tries to open a file that you have already opened, you 
will get an error.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
file_name = "favorite_food.txt"
file_handle = open(file_name)
file_handle.write(favorite_food)
file_handle.close()
```

Next: [3.2. File Input](3.2.%20File%20Input.md)<br>
Previous: [3.0. Terminal Input and Output](3.0.%20Terminal%20Input%20and%20Output.md)
