# 3.2. File Input

Reading input from files is also easy.  Let's imagine that in the same directory we are running our program, we have a 
text file called "animals.txt" with the following data:

```text
dog
cat
mouse
lion
tiger
elephant
cow
horse
pig
```

Imagine that we want to open this file, read in the data, and store it in a list. That's very simple, though there a 
a couple of different ways that we can do it.

## The .read() Method

The first is the .read() method. To understand the .read() method, you have to imagine that there is a cursor in the 
file, and it starts at the very beginning of the file when you use the .open() method. So when you then use the .read()
method, it reads in the number of specified characters, and then moves the cursor to that position. If no number is 
specified, it reads everything until the end of the file. 

So if we use .read() with no number, we get the whole file stored as one big string. So if we want the data in a list, 
we're going to need to parse that string. Remember that because in the file, each animal was on its own line, so in 
reality, the string looks like this: "dog\ncat\nmouse\nlion\n\tiger\nelephant\ncow\nhorse\npig". There is no \n after 
pig, because there is no new line after pig, which you can tell because there isn't a blank line at the end of the file. 

So how do we convert this to a list? It's easy because we have the same character between each of our words: \n. 
So we can just split using that character.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(animal_file_name)
data = animal_file_handle.read()
animal_file_handle.close()

animal_list = data.split('\n')
```

If we had passed a number argument to .read(), then the cursor is in that position, and so the next time .read() is 
used, it will start there. Using read with a number is actually pretty rare, since we rarely have a file organized
in terms of precise numbers of characters. But .read() without any numbers can be useful if we want to just store the 
data as as string for now, and worry about how to parse it later. Sometimes this can be an issue if the file is really 
big (like gigabytes big), and you end up with more data than the amount of RAM you have on your computer. If this 
happens your computer will start running very, very slow because it will be using your hard drive memory instead of your
RAM memory to store the data, and accessing your hard drive is much much slower than accessing RAM. 

## The .readline() and .readlines() Methods

The .readline() function reads in one line at a time. Basically it goes from wherever the cursor is (which starts at the
beginning of the file) until it encounters a \n, and stores all the characters in between into a string. You can use it
more than once to get more than one line. You could use .read() to read in our file and create a list. But you would 
need to use the .readline() method nine times. That wouldn't be very pretty, and it would rely on you knowing it needed
to happen nine times.

The .readlines() method works similarly to .readline(), except that it reads multiple lines and stores the result in a 
list. This is very close to what we need. The only issue is that the file has no \n characters in it, so these will end
up in the list, which would make your list look like this: ['dog\n', 'cat\n', 'mouse\n', ...]. To fix this we could
then use a loop to remove those characters.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(file_name)
data = animal_file_handle.readlines()
animal_file_handle.close()

animal_list = data.split('\n')

for i in range(len(animal_list)):
    animal_list[i] = animal_list[i].strip('\n')

```

## Looping Through Files

Another method, and a very useful one, is to loop through a file using the file object itself as the sequence. 
Remember that a for loop must use a sequence in the definition of a for loop, and python lets you treat the file as a 
sequence, with each line being a sequence element.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(file_name)
animal_list = []

for line in animal_file_handle:
    animal = line.strip('\n')
    animal_list.append(animal)
animal_file_handle.close()
```

## The With Statement

A final useful trick to use when reading files in python is the *with* statement.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_list = []

with open(animal_file_name) as animal_file_handle:
    for line in animal_file_handle:
        animal = line.strip('\n')
        animal_list.append(animal)
```

Next: [3.3. Graphical User Interfaces](3.3.%20Graphical%20User%20Interfaces.md)<br>
Previous: [3,1. File Output](3.1.%20File%20Output.md)
