# 1.1. Variables

One of the major concepts to master in computer programming is the notion of a variable and that variables can contain 
different kinds of data. In Python, variables are created by just assigning some kind of data to the variable.
```python 
x = 3
y = True
z = ["lions", "tigers", "bears"]
```
There are many different kinds of data types in Python, including different data types for different kinds of 
numbers (*int*, *float*, and *complex*), *str* (short for string) for sequences of characters, and more complex data 
types like *list*, *set*, and *dict* (short for dictionary). We will learn about different data types in the next 
section ([1.2. Data Types](1.2.%20Data%20Types.md)). 


## Legal Variable Names

Python's syntax has rules about what you are allowed to use as a variable name. 
- Variables names can only contain letters (A-Z), numbers (0-9), and underscores ( _ ), no other symbols.
- Variables names must start with a letter or an underscore; they cannot start with a number.
- Variables are case-sensitive, meaning that the variable "x" and "X" are different variables.


## Variable Naming Conventions

Beyond the rules listed rules, you can legally name variables whatever you want. However, there are some conventions 
about good usage, and not following these rules will make your code stand out as "improper" or "unprofessional." 
Different programming languages have different conventions, so the conventions for Python may not be the same as for 
other languages like C# or Java. For now, we will cover basic conventions for the simple data types we have discussed 
so far and bring up others as they arise.

All variable names should prioritize making the meaning of the variable clear. Someone should be able to look at a 
variable name and intuitively know what that variable is for. For this reason, in general, single-letter variables 
(like x and y and z) or generic names (like "myvar") should be avoided. Instead, use names that express what that 
variable is being used to store. For example, if you have a program that stores a question and an answer to the 
question in a variable, name them "question" and "answer", not "x" and "y" or "q" and "a". There are some exceptions 
to this, such as when you are instantiating well-known math formulas (like "y = mx + b", in which case using the 
variables y, x, m, and b would be ok).

If it helps with readability and understanding, it is perfectly fine to have variable names that are multiple words. 
If I have a program that counts the number of words in a person's answer, I might call that variable "word_count". 
Note that in Python, the convention is separate words in a variable name with an underscore. The variable names 
"wordcount",  "wordCount",  "WordCount", "WORDCOUNT", and "WORD_COUNT" would all be legal names, but calling it one 
of those would violate the conventions of Python.
- The two without spaces (word count and WORDCOUNT) are not preferred because not having any marker of the word boundary 
can make it harder to understand when reading. 
- The all-caps version with an underscore (WORD_COUNT) is not preferred except in a special case. All caps variables 
are typically used in Python to convey that the variable is a constant, a value that will never change throughout the 
program. This is not a part of the syntax; it is not illegal to change a variable name if it is in all caps. It is 
just a convention that is followed to make programs easier to understand.

## Assigning Variables to Other Variables

You can assign variables to other variables. With the basic data types bool, int, float, and str, when a variable is 
assigned to another variable, it creates a copy of the data and stores the data in the second variable.

In the code below where "y = x", the value 5 is copied from x and stored in y. This means that if the original 
variable (x) gets changed later, it doesn't change y along with it; y stays the same. In the first print statement, 
x and y are the same, and so "5 5" will be the result of the print statement. In the second print statement, the 
result will be "8 5". In computer programming, we refer to this as "copy by value". This can be contrasted with 
"copy by reference". If Python were using copy by reference, then the statement y = x would just assign y a pointer 
(like a shortcut) to the variable x, meaning the both "point to" the same variable, with the result being that if x 
is changed later, y changes too. This distinction is important because later, when we get to more complex data 
structures like lists, sets, and dictionaries, we will see that they follow the "copy by reference" rule.
```python
x = 5
y = x
print(x, y)

x = 8
print(x, y)
```

Next: [1.2. Data Types](1.2.%20Data%20Types.md)<br>
Previous: [1.0. Python Statements & Expressions](1.0.%20Python%20Statements%20&%20Expressions.md)
