# 1.2 Data Types

Python has eight categories of built-in data types:

|  | |
| --- | --- |
| str | strings of text |
| int, float, complex | numeric variables |
| bool | boolean (True/False) variables |
| bytes, bytearray, memoryview | binary variables |
| NoneType | None type variables |
| list, tuple, range | sequence variables |
| dict | mapping variables |
| set, frozenset | set variables |

We will discuss most of these data types in upcoming sections, some in this chapter and others in later ones. 
A few we won't cover, but we will provide links if you want to learn more. But before we dive into specifics, 
first, we need to deal with some facts that are true of all data types.


## Dynamic vs. Static Data Types
One important thing before we take a look at specific data types. One thing that makes Python different from many 
other popular programming languages (like Java, Javascript,  C++, and C#) is that Python variables are considered 
to be "dynamic". This means that a Python variable is, by default, not inherently of a particular type but takes on 
the type of whatever value you assign to it. This means that you can change it at will by assigning different values 
to it.

```Python
x = 3  # here x is an int, because I assigned an int to it
x = "dog"  # now x is a str, because I assigned a string to it
x = True  # now x is a boolean variable
x = "True"  # now x is back to being a string, because there are quotes
```

When a Python program is run, the Python interpreter makes an inference about what kind of variable is stored based 
on the data. If there are quotes (single or double) around the data, it makes it a string. If it is a number with a 
decimal, it makes it a float. If it is a number without a decimal, it makes it an int. If it is the word *True* or 
*False*, without quotes and with the first letter capitalized, it makes it a boolean variable.

Compare this to a language like C#, where the variables are "static", meaning they are defined as a particular type. 
In C#, when you create a variable, you have to specify what kind it is. And if you tried to assign "dog" to x in the 
example below, it would generate an error because x had been declared as an int.

```c#
int x = 3; 
string y = "dog";
```

Python having dynamic variables makes it a very flexible programming language and makes programming in Python 
faster and easier. But it also can lead to errors in the code that are harder to catch. In C#, if you try to 
assign "dog" to an int, you will get an error and know immedietely that something is wrong. In Python, you 
won't get an error; it will let you change what is stored in the variable from an int to string. This can be 
bad if you didn't mean to change the type of the variable and were expecting it to be a certain type later.

In statically-typed languages, we tend to have a lot more *syntax errors* at compile or run-time. A **syntax error** 
is an error due to violating the rules of legal statements in the language.

In dynamically-typed languages, we tend to have a lot more *semantic* *errors*. A semantic error is when the program 
runs without generating an error, but the program doesn't do what you intended it to do. These errors can be harder to 
catch and debug. So the flexibility of Python comes with a price and means you need to think more carefully about your 
variables.

## Data Type Casting

In Python, you can convert a kind of data or a variable from one type of data to another using datacasting.

```Python
x = int(5.8)  # x will be 5. Casting a float as an int truncates decimals
y = int("5")  # y will be the int 5, and no longer a string  
z = int("dog")  # this line will generate an error; int() only converts numbers

x = float(5)  # x will be 5.0
y = float("5")  # x will be 5.0
z = float("5.2") # x will be 5.2, no longer a string
w = float("dog") # will generate an error; float() only converts numbers

x = str(5)  # x will be "5", now a string and not an int
y = str(5.0)  # y will be "5.0", now a string and not a float
```

Next: [1.3. Strings](1.3.%20Strings.md)<br>
Previous: [1.1. Variables](1.1.%20Variables.md)
