# 3.0 Functions

The concept of a function is one of the most important in computer programming. A function is a block of code that only runs when it is called. Functions often take input data (called parameters) and either execute some action (like printing data to the screen or a file) or else return some kind of data back to where the function was called.

One of the main advantages of using functions in computer code is that when you have a certain block of code that you will need to use many times, you can turn that code into a function. Then you can call that function over and over instead of needing to retype and duplicate the code each time you want that code to run.

We've already used many functions (such as print() and sum()), and we can use them to illustrate the point. If you have two lists of numbers like x = [1, 2, 3, 21, 32] and y = [51, 32, 1], you could write two different loops, one that sums the first list and a second that sums the second list. To eliminate this need for redundant code for such a commonly used operation, python has implemented the sum() function. Functions save a lot of time. There are many such built-in functions, but in this chapter, we are going to focus on creating your own.

Functions have many advantages that should make you want to use them all the time. In addition to making it so you don't have to rewrite code many times, functions make your code much more concise and well-organized. It also makes your code much easier to debug. Imagine you have a block of code that you are re-using multiple times, and you discover there is a mistake in it. If that code is in a function, you only have to make one change to the function. If, instead, you have rewritten the code in several places, then you need to make the change in each one of those places.

In Python, functions are easy to create. Let's show a simple example.


```python
def print_favorite_food(name, favorite_food):
    print("Hello! {}".format(name))
    print("Your favorite food is {}!".format(favorite_food))

print_favorite_food("Jon", "pizza")

first_name = "Jessica"
food = "noodles"
print_favorite_food(first_name, food)
```

The code above creates the "print_favorite_food" function. The "print_favorite_food" function has two parameters, a 
variable called "name" and a variable called "favorite_food".

Functions, like *if* statements and loops, use indentation to denote what code "belongs to" the function. Each time the 
function is called, the code inside the function executes. This is an important point; the code that you 
put inside a function does *not* execute until that function is used. The Python interpreter, when it sees a function 
definition (a line that starts with "def"), makes note that the function exists and then effectively ignores all 
further indented lines inside the function until the function is used. Then it goes back and executes those lines of 
code.

## Passing Variables into Functions

Note that when the function is used, values need to be passed into the function that correspons to those in its 
definition. They can be hard-coded values, as in the first example, or they can be variables that contain values, as in 
the second example. Also note that if a variable is put into a function, it does not have to be named the same thing as 
the variables defined inside the function. In fact, it is considered good programming practice to name variables inside 
and outside a function with different names so that they don't get confused. But this is just a convention; unless the 
variables are explicitly declared as a "global" variable, the variables inside a function are completely independent of 
any outside of the function. We will discuss this issue more in later sections.

## Function Naming Rules and Conventions

A final thing to consider regarding functions is the rules and conventions for how they should be named. Remember that 
the rules MUST be followed; violating the rules will generate a syntax error. The rules for function names are pretty 
simple:
 - they must start with a "def", 
 - have a space between def and the name 
 - have parentheses after the name (even if no parameters are defined for the function, you still put empty parentheses
 - end with a colon
 - like all other rules for variable names in Python, they cannot start with a number or special character

One other thing to beware of is that you should be careful about using names that are already defined as functions in 
python. This will not generate an error, but it will mean that you are redefining that word to do what your function 
does from that point on, and the Python predefined version of that function will no longer be available.

As far as conventions go, there are several conventions for Python functions (habits you should develop for naming 
functions, even if they don't generate an error): 
- name them like variables
  - using lowercase descriptive words that mean something
  - if you use more than one word, separate them by underscores
- differentiate variable names and function names by using nouns for variables and verbs for functions. Remember that
variables are objects, so noun names make sense. In contrast, the functions "do something", so it makes sense to use a verb 
as their name.

Next: [3.1. Passing Arguments into Functions](3.1.%20Passing%20Arguments%20into%20Functions.md)<br>
Previous: [2.10. Lab 2](../CH02/2.10.%20Lab%202.md)
