# 3.4. The .main() Function

Now that we understand functions and global vs. local variables, we can introduce something 
important: the main function. It is very common and considered good practice to have all of 
your python scripts have a structure like that below:

```python
# your import statements here

def example_function(x):
    y = x**2
    return y

def main():
    result = example_function(25)
    print(result)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```
You should have only four kinds of things defined at the global level of your script:
1) Import statements at the very beginning of the file
2) The main function definition
3) Any other functions you define and that are called from inside other functions 
(including main())
4) An if statement exactly like the one above

So what is up with that if statement? Let's start by thinking about what this script would 
be like without it and with the main function call inside the if statement being outside of it
and tabbed fully to the left. In this case, when the Python interpreter reads the file, it would 
note (but not execute) the definition of each function, including the main. Then it would get to that
last line and see the main function called, and so execute the main function, which would, in 
turn, call the other functions you define.

One advantage of organizing your scripts like this is that the functions inside it can be 
reused in other scripts. The exact same way that we learned to do "import tkinter" and use all 
its functionality, we can do with our own scripts. If we write a function (or set of functions) we
like, we can import our own script and access the functions.

But if the main function was called at the global level outside the if statement we have above,
then the entire script would execute if you tried to import it into another file. But having the
main function call inside this if statement, the main function will execute if this script is run
directly in Python but will not run if this script is imported into another script.

For more information, if you are interested, you can read this:
[https://realpython.com/if-name-main-python/](https://realpython.com/if-name-main-python/)

Next: [3.5. An Example Program](3.5.%20An%20Example%20Program.md)<br>
Previous: [3.3. Local and Global Variables](3.3.%20Local%20and%20Global%20Variables.md)
