# 2.1 *Range* and *Enumerate*

In addition to strings, Python has many other types of sequences that can be used as iterators for loops: these include
lists, tuples, dictionaries, and sets. We will cover how to use a *for* loop to iterate over these sequences when we 
learn about those data types.

For now, there are two other kinds of sequences we want to introduce.

## The *range()* Function

The range function gives you an object that is a sequence of numbers in a given range.

```python
x = range(5)
y = len(x)
print(x)  # result is range(0, 5), which can also be thought of as the sequence: 0,1,2,3,4
print(y)  # result would be 5, the length of the sequence
```

The code above creates a range object and stores it in the variable x. If you print x, you will see that it contains 
two pieces of information: the number that starts the sequence and the number that ends the sequence. This end 
number can be a bit confusing at first. It is not the last number in the sequence, but the number *after* the last 
number. Range objects' ending number work just like the number we used to end a string slice in the previous
section. The final number is the stopping point but is not actually one of the numbers in the sequence. This means that 
range(5) is actually the sequence (0,1,2,3,4). One way to think about it is that the number entered into the range 
function is the length of the sequence (5), and it starts at 0, so it must end at 4. You can verify the size of the 
sequence in range() data type by using len() as was done above.

The range() function is useful if you want to specify a loop to run a specific number of times. The *loop* below
sums all of the numbers from 1 to x. So if we want to sum the numbers 1 to 5, then we need the loop to run 5 times. So 
we just need a range() object that is 5 elements long.

```python
# code that sums all the numbers from 1 to x, in this case x = 5, and so the sum = 1+2+3+4+5 = 15
x = 5
the_sum = 0
for i in range(x):
	the_sum += i + 1
print(the_sum)  # the result would be 15
```

When a range object is created, there are actually three arguments (pieces of information the function uses to create 
the object1):
1) the starting point of the sequence (which defaults to 0 if it is not specified)
2) the stopping point of the sequence (the number we entered and which must be entered)
3) the step size (or increment size, which defaults to 1 if it is not specified)

So when we typed range(5), that was actually the same as if we had typed range(0,5,1). It's just that the 0 and 1 are 
the default. But if, for some reason, you want to specify a more complex range with different starting points, or  
different step sizes, you can. Say you wanted to sum all odd numbers from 1 to 21:

```python
the_sum = 0
for i in range(1,22,2):
	the_sum += i
print(the_sum)  # the result is 1+3+5+7+9+11+13+15+17+19+21=132
```

## The *enumerate()* Function

If we use a for loop to iterate over a string, we get each element in the string one at a time. If we iterate using the 
range() function, we get a counter variable at each iteration, and we could use that as an index to access a sequence
like a list. This gives us two different ways we can iterate through a sequence and also have a index variable that 
keeps track of where we are in the sequence:

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"

index = 0
for letter in favorite_food:
    print(index, letter)
    index += 1

for index in range(len(favorite_food)):
    print(index, favorite_food[index])
```

Both of these produce the same output:
```text
0 p
1 i
2 z
3 z
4 a
```

Both also, however, require us to do some extra work. In the first example, we have to create an index variable
and increment it each pass through the list. In the second example, the loop does this for us, but then we have to use
the loop's index variable to access the letter in the string. These both work fine, but Python gives us an automatic 
way to do both at the same time, the enumerate() function. The enumerate function must be given a sequence just like the
range() function, but it automatically gives us an object that contains both the individual elements of the sequence and 
the index.
```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
for letter, index in enumerate(favorite_food):
    print(index, letter)
```

Next: [2.2. While Loops](2.2.%20While%20Loops.md)<br>
Previous: [2.0. For Loops](2.0%20The%20For%20Loop.md)
