# 2.2. While Loops

For loops are blocks of code that iterate for a specified number of times (the length of the iterator object that is
specified in the for loop). In contrast, a while loop is loop that iterates continuously while certain conditions are
true. The example below is a while loop that will iterate until the x variable reaches a certain value.

```python
x = 0

while x < 5:
    print(x)
    x += 1
```

In the example above, there is not really a difference between a while loop and a for loop. The while loop is 
necessarily going to iterate 5 times, and so a for loop would do the same thing. But there are many cases where we
want code to do something until a condition is reached that will be something other than just iterating over a sequence.
Most of the obvious examples involve lists, which we will go over in the next section. But we can give a simple example
with a string. Imagine we want to go through a sequence of numbers, but stop when their sum reaches a certain value:
```python
number_sequence_string = "161272346154"
sequence_sum = 0
stop_value = 30
i = 0

while sequence_sum  < stop_value:
    sequence_sum += int(number_sequence_string[i])
    i += 1
    print(i, sequence_sum)

```
The result of the code above is:
```text
1 1
2 7
3 8
4 10
5 17
6 19
7 22
8 26
9 32
```
 
Now, you might spot a potential problem with the logic above. What happens if the sum never gets over 30? What if,
for example, the sequence was "0000010100". In this case, i would eventually reach 10, and try to access location 10 in
the string, but there is no location 10 (the string's length is 10, so the last spot is 9). This would case the program 
to get an error. But you could protect against that problem with a slightly more complex while statement:

```python
number_sequence_string = "0000010100"
sequence_sum = 0
stop_value = 30
i = 0
sequence_length = len(number_sequence_string)

while (sequence_sum < stop_value) and (i < sequence_length-1):
    print(i, sequence_sum, sequence_sum < stop_value, i < sequence_length-1)
    sequence_sum += int(number_sequence_string[i])
    i += 1
```

with the output:

```text
0 0 True True
1 0 True True
2 0 True True
3 0 True True
4 0 True True
5 0 True True
6 1 True True
7 1 True True
8 2 True True
```

This time, in the while loop we have two conditions and require them both to be true for the while loop to continue.
For clarity, we also printed out both inside the while loop.

VERY IMPORTANT ADVICE: Make use of ubiquitous print statements to see the values of your variables. It will help you
detect errors, and make sure your code is doing what it is supposed to be doing.

## Infinite While Loops

Another risk of while loops is that you could create a situation where they could run for an infinite number of times 
because the stop condition is never reached:
```python
x = 1

while x > 0:
    print(x)
    x += 1
```
If you were to run the previous example (DONT!!!), it would freeze your terminal application, because the loop would 
never end. The variable x starts greater than 1, and just keeps getting bigger. If this happens, you will get the 
spinning frozen icon in on your computer, and your only recourse will be to force quit the terminal application (using
CMD-Option-Escape on a Mac, or CTRL-Alt-Delete on Windows.) If this happens its not a serious problem, but you will need
to restart the terminal and go back to the folder and all that. In the next section, we will show you a handy way you 
can catch and exit from an infinite while loop within your program so you don't have to force quit the terminal.

Next: [2.3. Continue and Break](2.3.%20Continue%20and%20Break.md)<br>
Previous: [2.1. Range and Enumerate](2.1.%20Range%20and%20Enumerate.md)