# 2.3. *Continue* and *Break*

The python commands *continue* and *break* are two ways to exert control over loops.

The *continue* command allows you to skip the current iteration of the loop, and move on to the next iteration. The 
*break* command can be used to exit the loop altogether. A common use case of *continue* and *break* is at the beginning 
of a loop, to check for special conditions that make you not want to be in the loop anymore.

Here is an example of using continue in a *for* loop:

```python
increment_amount = 2
for i in range(0,10,increment_amount):
    if i == 5:
        continue
    print(i)
```
 
This code prints every number from 0 to 9 in steps of 2, except 5. So in this case, 0,2,4,6,8. With 
*increment_amount* set to 2, 5 would not have been in the range object so wouldn't have printed regardless. But if
*increment_amount* were 1, or 5, it would be in the *range* object, and would be skipped. When python sees the 
*continue*  statement, it immediately stops the current iteration of the loop and goes on to the next one, skipping all 
other code in the loop.
 
Here is an example of *break*, this time in a *while* loop:

```python
x = 0
increment_amount = 1
while x < 100:
    if x < 0:
        break
    print(x)
    x += increment_amount
```

The code above prints every number from 0 to 99, in increments of whatever *increment_amount* is set to.
If that is 1 it will be 0,1,2,3,4,...99. If it is 10, it will be 0,10,20,30,...,90. But what happens if 
*increment_amount* is set to a negative number? Then we would have an infinite while loop, because *x* would never 
become > 100. The *if* statement checks to see if *x* goes negative, and exits the loop if it does, avoiding the 
infinite loop.

Now, you might wonder why do it that way, instead of:
```python
x = 0
increment_amount = 1
while (x < 100) and (increment_amount > 0):
    print(x)
    x += increment_amount
```

In the situation above, both blocks of code work the same way. Some people do argue that most cases of continue and 
break can be solved in other ways, and are better solved in other ways. But there are times when they really are the 
easiest way to solve a problem, and so it is good to know they exist. 

But whether you use a break statement or add an extra condition to a while loop definition, it can be a useful way to
check for an infinite loop:
```python
while_loop_counter = 0
while_loop_max = 1000000

while i < 100: 
    print(i)
    while_loop_counter += 1
    if while_loop_counter > while_loop_max:
        print("WARNING: while loop iterated {} times without ending".format(while_loop_max))
        break

while (i < 100) and (while_loop_counter < while_loop_max): 
    print(i)
    while_loop_counter += 1
    if while_loop_counter > while_loop_max:
        print("WARNING: while loop iterated {} times without ending".format(while_loop_max))
        break
```

The *while* loops above never change *i*, the variable being used to decide when the while loops should end, so they 
will loop forever. If you are someone who worries about about infinite while loops, you can get in the habit of always 
adding a *counter* and *max* variable to every while loop you create to catch infinite loops. You can use this trick 
either with a *break* statement as in the first example, or just including it in a condition in the *while* loop 
declaration.

Next: [2.4. Lists](2.4.%20Lists.md)<br>
Previous: [2.2. While Loops](2.2.%20While%20Loops.md)