# 2.6. Tuples

Tuples are the final data structure we need to deal with in this chapter. Tuples are just like lists, except that they
are immutable. This, you might remember, means that they cannot be changed. Tuples are created using parentheses, 
compared to the square brackets we used for a list.

```python
some_list = [1, 2, 3, 4]
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 4)

x = some_list[2]  # x = 3
y = some_tuple[2]  # y = 3

some_list[3] = -4  # changes list to [1, 2, 3, -4]
some_tuple[3] = -4  # this will generate a syntax error because tuples are immutable
```

Why have an immutable version of a list? There are a couple of reasons. First, there may be some times you want to 
create a data structure that you want to protect so that it cannot change. Making something a tuple is a good way to
guarantee that the data won't change.

A second reason, which we will learn more about later, is that certain other more complex data types require the use
of immutable data types. For example, we will learn later about sets. Sets are like lists that can't have duplicates. 
Sets also require the data in them to be immutable, like strings, ints, floats, or tuples; you can't create a set of
lists.

## Converting Between Tuples and Lists

Now, let's say you find yourself with a tuple that you do want to change. You can easily convert a list to a tuple and 
back.
```python
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 4)
some_list = list(some_tuple)

another_tuple = tuple(some_list)
another_list = list(another_tuple)

some_list[0] = -1
print(some_tuple)
print(some_list)
print(another_tuple)
print(another_list)

``` 

This creates the output:
```text
(1, 2, 3, 4)
[-1, 2, 3, 4]
(1, 2, 3, 4)
[1, 2, 3, 4]
```

Notice that the first list was changed as expected, but the second list was not. When a list is converted to a tuple and
then back to a list, a copy is made; it is not another "copy by reference" situation.

## Tuple Methods

Because tuples are immutable, they don't have most of the methods that lists have, like append(), remove(), insert(), 
etc. There are only two methods for tuples:

```python
some_tuple = (1, 2, 3, 4)
x = some_tuple.count(3)  # x = 1, the number of times that 2 occurs in the tuple
x = some_tuple.index(3)  # x = 2, the index of the location of the first occurrence of 3 in the tuple
```

Next: [2.7. Looping Over Lists and Tuples](2.7.%20Looping%20Over%20Lists%20and%20Tuples.md)<br>
Previous: [2.5. List Methods](2.5.%20List%20Methods.md)
