# 2.9. File Input and Output

Terminal output is very useful for getting information about how our program is working and for debugging. Terminal 
input is occasionally useful but is not used often. In the vast majority of Python programs, the way we typically
get input and output is by using data files. 

Consider homework 1, for example. It would be really painful to have to manually type in the data from an experiment, 
either into the terminal or into the Python script itself. What we want instead is a program that reads a data file, 
does the calculations, and outputs data to another file. In this section, we will start with learning how to create, 
modify, and write files.

## File Input

### Opening Files

In Python, before we can read from or write to a file, we need to open the file. What that means in Python is 
effectively telling Python where the file is (or where it should be created if it doesn't exist) and then telling
python to create a "file object" variable, which includes information like the file's name and location, both in 
the terms we are used to reading (like "/Users/jon/Desktop/my_file.txt") and also in terms of its memory location 
address in terms the computer understands (those hex code numbers we talked about on day 1). 

In Python, these file object data types are typically referred to as "file handles," and so it is common to name the 
variable where we are storing that object something that has that in it. It is variable, so you can name it anything 
you want (as long as it follows) the Python rules for variables), but it is a convention to include file_handle in the
variable name. You want to make sure you remember that the file_handle (the file itself) might be a separate variable
from a string variable where you are keeping track of the file's name or location.

```python
file_path = "~/Desktop/"
file_name = "test_file.txt"
file_handle = open(file_path + file_name)
```

The code above would try to open a file called "test_file.txt" that is on the Desktop. If that file does not exist,
this line will get an error. In a few weeks, we will learn a handy trick to test to see if a file exists before trying
to open it so you don't get this error.

The open() function can take a number of other arguments that affect the file object that is being created. If no 
arguments are specified, then the file object being created is a "read" object, a file that you are trying to read.
This is why you get an error if the file doesn't exist. But what if you want to create a new file and write to it? Then
you just need to supply an additional argument to the open function like this:

```python
file_handle = open(file_name, "w")
```

The "w" tells Python that this is a file you want to write. Python will therefore create a file with that name. Two things to
remember:
- if you only specify a name (as in the example immediately above), and do not supply a full path (as in the first
        example), then the file will be created in the same location as the Python script that is running that line
        of code.
- the "w" command creates and writes a file with that name, even if there is already a file with that name. It will 
    overwrite any existing file with that name. So be careful not to accidentally overwrite a file you don't want to 
    erase! There are some alternatives to avoid this, noted below
    
There are a number of other options you can use instead of "w".
```python
file_handle = open(file_name, "r")  # opens a file for reading, the default if no option is specified
file_handle = open(file_name, "x")  # opens a file only if the file does not exist and gives an error if it does
file_handle = open(file_name, "a")  # Creates new file if none exists; opens existing file to append to it if one does 
```

### Writing to Files

Writing to files is a lot like using the print() statement, except the output ends up in the file instead of in the 
terminal. 

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
file_name = "favorite_food.txt"
file_handle = open(file_name)
file_handle.write(favorite_food)
```

There are a couple of differences between the .write() method and the print() function. Remember that print() 
automatically inserts a '\n' at the end of whatever it is told to print. The .write() method doesn't do that. So if 
you want to write multiple lines to a file, you need to insert those line breaks yourself. In the code below, the 
output to the terminal and in the file would look the same.

```python
favorite_food_list = ['pizza', 'ice cream', 'strawberries']
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for food in favorite_food_list:
    print(food)
    file_handle.write(food + "\n")
```

Other than that, print() and .write() are pretty much the same. You can do all the same string formatting that you 
might do in a print() statement in a .write() statement.

```python
number_list = [3.2332523, 5.1231241, 6.1241]
food_list = ['pizza', 'ice cream', 'strawberries']
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for i in range(len(food_list)):
    file_handle.write("{}: {:0.3f}\n".format(food_list[i], number_list[i]))
```

Of course, if we follow our "keep different operations separate" principle, we may want to split that written statement
into two lines:

```python
number_list = [3.2332523, 5.1231241, 6.1241]
food_list = ['pizza', 'ice cream', 'strawberries']
file_handle = open("favorite_foods.txt", "w")
for i in range(len(food_list)):
    output_string = "{}: {:0.3f}\n".format(food_list[i], number_list[i])
    file_handle.write(output_string)
```

### Closing a file

When you are done working with a file, you should close the file. This is especially important if you are going to be
working with multiple files and re-using the file_handle variable name (like in a loop). If you don't, you might end
up accidentally writing to the wrong file. And if your program tries to open a file that you have already opened, you 
will get an error.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
file_name = "favorite_food.txt"
file_handle = open(file_name)
file_handle.write(favorite_food)
file_handle.close()
```

## File Input

Reading input from files is also easy. Let's imagine that in the same directory, we are running our program; we have a 
text file called "animals.txt" with the following data:

```text
dog
cat
mouse
lion
tiger
elephant
cow
horse
pig
```

Imagine that we want to open this file, read the data, and store it in a list. That's very simple, though there a 
a couple of different ways that we can do it.

### The .read() Method

The first is the .read() method. To understand the .read() method, you have to imagine that there is a cursor in the 
file, and it starts at the very beginning of the file when you use the .open() method. So when you then use the .read()
method, it reads in the number of specified characters and then moves the cursor to that position. If no number is 
specified, it reads everything until the end of the file. 

So if we use .read() with no number, we get the whole file stored as one big string. So if we want the data in a list, 
we're going to need to parse that string. Remember that because in the file, each animal was on its own line, so in 
reality, the string looks like this: "dog\ncat\nmouse\nlion\n\tiger\nelephant\ncow\nhorse\npig". There is no \n after 
pig because there is no new line after pig, which you can tell because there isn't a blank line at the end of the file. 

So how do we convert this to a list? It's easy because we have the same character between each of our words: \n. 
So we can just split using that character.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(animal_file_name)
data = animal_file_handle.read()
animal_file_handle.close()

animal_list = data.split('\n')
```

If we had passed a number argument to .read(), then the cursor is in that position, and so the next time .read() is 
used, it will start there. Using read with a number is actually pretty rare since we rarely have a file organized
in terms of precise numbers of characters. But .read() without any numbers can be useful if we want to just store the 
data as a string for now and worry about how to parse it later. Sometimes this can be an issue if the file is really 
big (like gigabytes big), and you end up with more data than the amount of RAM you have on your computer. If this 
happens, your computer will start running very, very slow because it will be using your hard drive memory instead of your
RAM memory to store the data, and accessing your hard drive is much much slower than accessing RAM. 

### The .readline() and .readlines() Methods

The .readline() function reads one line at a time. Basically, it goes from wherever the cursor is (which starts at the
beginning of the file) until it encounters a \n and stores all the characters in between into a string. You can use it
more than once to get more than one line. You could use .read() to read in our file and create a list. But you would 
need to use the .readline() method nine times. That wouldn't be very pretty, and it would rely on you knowing it needed
to happen nine times.

The .readlines() method works similarly to .readline(), except that it reads multiple lines and stores the result in a 
list. This is very close to what we need. The only issue is that the file has no \n characters in it, so these will end
up in the list, which would make your list look like this: ['dog\n', 'cat\n', 'mouse\n', ...]. To fix this, we could
then use a loop to remove those characters.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(animal_file_name)
animal_list = animal_file_handle.readlines()
animal_file_handle.close()

for i in range(len(animal_list)):
    animal_list[i] = animal_list[i].strip('\n')

```

### Looping Through Files

Another method, and a very useful one, is to loop through a file using the file object itself as the sequence. 
Remember that a for loop must use a sequence in the definition of a for loop, and Python lets you treat the file as a 
sequence, with each line being a sequence element.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_file_handle = open(animal_file_name)
animal_list = []

for line in animal_file_handle:
    animal = line.strip('\n')
    animal_list.append(animal)
animal_file_handle.close()
```

### The With Statement

A final useful trick to use when reading files in Python is the *with* statement.

```python
animal_file_name = "animals.txt"
animal_list = []

with open(animal_file_name) as animal_file_handle:
    for line in animal_file_handle:
        animal = line.strip('\n')
        animal_list.append(animal)
```

Next: [2.10. Lab 2](2.10.%20Lab%202.md)<br>
Previous: [2.8. Terminal Input and Output](2.8.%20Terminal%20Input%20and%20Output.md)
