# 13.0. Creating Experiments

In this chapter we are going to learn how to make a program that runs an experiment and saves the data. We will try to 
demonstrate both some good experimental design practices, as well as programming practices for making experiments.

How does creating an experiment differ from writing a normal python program? There are a couple of issues that become 
very prominent.

### Transparency and Replicability

In recent years, the psychological and social science research has become much more focused on making experiments more 
transparent and reproducible. This means that, for example, in order to get an experiment published it is very likely 
that you will be asked to share the code that you used to run the experiment. This means it is more important that the 
code is clear, well-organized, well-documented.

### Modules for Creating Experiments
We will also note that there are several modules for creating experiments in Python. The most popular of these is 
called `Psychopy` ([https://psychopy.org](https://psychopy.org)). However, we are not going to use any of them in this 
course, for a couple of reasons. The first is that they each have very specific strengths an weaknesses, particularly 
with regard to what operating systems they work best on. They can also be very difficult to install on some operating 
systems.

For these reasons, in this chapter we are going to cover some more basic principles of creating an experiment. Later, if 
creating experiments becomes important to you, you should be able to quickly learn to use the extra built-in functions
that `Psychopy` or other modules provide.

### Sample Experiment

Obviously, before writing code for an experiment, you need to know what experiment 

Next: [13.1. Describing a Sample Experiment](13.1.%20Describing%20a%20Sample%20Experiment.md)<br>
Previous: [12.X. Lab 12]