# 13.1. Describing a Sample Experiment

Before we can program an experiment, we need to know what experiment we want to create! This involves specifying in 
detail what the procedure will be, what the stimuli will be, and what data we want to record. In our example, we are 
going to create a simple memory experiment.

### Experiment Purpose
In our memory experiment, participants will go through two "phases", a "familiarization phase" and a "test phase". In 
the familiarization phase they will see a sequence of stimuli (either words or pictures) one at a time. In the test 
phase they will see a second sequence of stimuli (again one at a time). Some of the stimuli will be ones they saw 
previously during the familiarization phase ("old" stimuli), and some will be ones they did not see ("new" stimuli).

In our experiment, we will keep track of how many items each participant gets correct, as well as how long it takes them
(in milliseconds) to make a decision about each stimulus. In cognitive psychology experiments, reaction time is often 
recorded because it can give us extra information. For example, maybe certain stimuli are slightly more difficult to 
remember, but only a little bit. The participant may answer correctly on every trial, but perhaps they will take slightly
longer to make a decision about the harder stimuli. We can use differences in reaction times to make inferences about 
how memory is working, inferences that we sometimes cannot make from accuracy alone.

Our experiment is going to be designed to replicate a well known memory effect called the "list length" effect. 

### Experiment Structure & Designing for Adaptability and Re-use

Beyond the general description above, there are a lot of specific decisions we need to make about how to organize the
experiment. For example, how many trials will there be? How will our participants know what to do? Exactly how long 
will each stimulus be on the screen? Typically, we would base our decisions on these questions based on either 
theoretical considerations (e.g., we would present stimuli for either a short or a long time because we thought that 
would effect how well it was remembered), based on what others had done in previous experiments, or a combination of the 
two. 

Independent of what we want to do in our current experiment, it can be good to follow our general programming principle 
of trying to make sure our code is written in a way to maximize its re-usability and adaptability. That would mean that 
for example, instead of hard-coding the time a stimulus is on the screen, we would make it a variable that is easily 
modifiable and can be changed later. Following these ideas, how should we make our experiment?

First, let's think things through at a general level. What do we need our participants to do?
1) Get instructions about the familiarization phase
2) Go through the familiarization phase
3) Get instructions about the test phase
4) Go through the test phase
5) Be told the experiment is done

So we can create a program that has those steps as different functions. But notice that steps 1, 3, and 5 are all 
pretty similar. They are probably just going to involve presenting some text on the screen, and waiting for the 
participant to press a button to move on. So we can have one function for each of these steps, and just pass 
that function the text that needs to be presented. Likewise, the familiarization and test phases are quite possibly very 
similar, perhaps only with different stimuli being presented in each phase. So we can create a single function and  pass 
it the list of stimuli to be presented.

A final issue to bring up about experiment re-use and adaptability is to point out that conceptually our experiment 
has at least two different functional parts:
- code for moving through each phase of the experiment, choosing the stimuli, and keeping track of the data
- code for presenting stimuli to the screen, and recording responses

These are functionally different in the sense that they will make use of very different python modules. The first one 
can mostly use all the python data structures you are already familiar with: loading and writing files, making lists or 
dictionaries of information, and looping over those data structures. In contrast, to present data to the screen, and to
keep track of how participants respond, we need to use some kind of user interface. We could theoretically use the 
terminal (at least for a text based experiment) but that wouldn't be very flexible. So we need to use a graphical user 
interface. For this we will use Tkinter (which we introduce briefly in CH11). But you could use Psychopy or a range of 
other options.Because you might want to use different graphical user interfaces, or even change what graphical user 
interface you use, it is good programming practice to keep these two parts of the code independent. We will do that in 
our example. 

Next: [13.2. Creating a Project Structure](13.2.%20Creating%20our%20Project%20Structure.md)<br>
Previous: [13.0. Creating Experiments](13.0.%20Creating%20Experiments.md)