# 13.3. Creating the Experiment

In this section we are going to accomplish three things. We will code the main script that we will run from 
the terminal when we want to run our experiment, called `run_experiment.py`. As a part of doing this, we will demonstrate
how you can import your own python scripts into another python script, as we will do here, by importing exp.py and gui.py
into run_experiment.py. Finally we will show how we will use a config.py file to set a lot of options in the program.

### Coding run_experiment.py

The run_experiment script is going to be very simple. It is really just going to create an instance of a GUI (graphical 
user interface) class object, and an instance of our Exp class, both of which we will code in later sections. Open 
`run_experiment.py` and add the following code:

```python
from src import exp
from src import gui

def main():
    the_gui = gui.GUI()
    the_experiment = exp.Exp(gui)
    the_gui.root.mainloop()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    main()
```

At the bottom we have our typical way of calling a main function. Inside the main function, we create an instance of 
our GUI class, which we pass to our creation of an Exp class. We then call the .mainloop() method for our GUI instance,
which is necessary to keep the experiment window open until we choose to close it. And that's it!

### Importing your own scripts and classes into another script

In earlier chapters you have learned about how to import python modules like `time` and `sys`, which are a part of the 
python core made by the same people who made python. You've also probably imported `numpy`, which is a third-party module, 
made by someone other than the creators of python. But it is imported the same way. 

But what if you want to import your own code? If the script you want to import is in the same directory as the script 
you are calling it from, all you need to do is include `import filename`, at the top of the file, where `filename` is 
the name of the script you want to import, without the .py at the end.

In our case, `exp.py` and `gui.py` are not in the same directory, as `run_experiment.py`. In this case we need to 
specify the path to the script using the syntax we did above. By typing `from src import exp`, we are telling python 
there is a directory named `src` in the same location as the current script (`run_experiment.py`), and we want to import 
the script `exp.py` that is inside that directory.

### Config Files

The final thing we need to set up before we start coding our two classes is our config file. This is where we will store 
our experiment's parameters, like the number of stimuli that will be shown and the amount of time they will be on the 
screen. As with the instructions, we are storing these in a separate file so they are easy to find and change without 
needing to look through the main code files.

Our config file is going to be a python file containing some python classes. This will make it very easy for our 
program to access these variables, and we won't need to manually read in a txt or csv file.

config.py
```python
class Config:
    
    # general window properties
    window_height = 800
    window_width = 1200
    
    # properties of the instructions
    instructions_bg_color = "white"
    instructions_font_color = "black"
    instructions_font_size = 18
    instructions_font = "helvetica"
    instruction_delay = 1000  # amount of time that timed instructions are on the screen

    # properties of the text and image stimuli
    stimulus_bg_color = "white"
    stimulus_font_color = "black"
    stimulus_font_size = 32
    stimulus_font = "helvetica"
    image_stimulus_height = 400
    image_stimulus_width = 400
    inter_trial_interval = 1000  # amount of time between trials, in ms
    stimulus_presentation_time = 1000  # amount of time each word or image is on the screen
    
    # properties of the familiarization phase
    num_familiarization_trials = 4
    familiarization_key_list = None  # which keys end trial, if None, will end after stimuluus presentation time

    # properties of the test phase
    num_test_trials = 4
    test_from_fam_proportion = 0.5  # percentage of test trials that were in the familiarization condition
    test_key_list = ["j", "k"]
    test_delay = 1000  # amount of time between familiarization and test phases
    
    # properties defining differences between text and image conditions
    condition = 1  # sets whether we will use words (0) or pictures (1) in the experiment
    instruction_file_path_list = ["stimuli/word_instructions.txt", "stimuli/image_instructions.txt"]
    stimulus_type_list = ["words", "pictures"]
```
Note that the code above is a python class, but it is a little different than the ones we have seen before. There are no
methods in this class, including no `__init__` method. Instead the attribute variables are defined directly, outside 
of any method. This means that we can access these class attributes without needing to create an instance of the class, 
like this:

```python
print(Config.window_height)  ## would print 800
```
One last detail to point out is that you might remember we created a file called `__init__.py` in the `config` folder. 
We haven't added any code to that file, and we don't need to. Why does the file exist? It is there to tell python that 
it should treat this file as a module that can be imported by any other file in the project that is called from our main
run_experiment.py file. If we didn't have this file, you would get a file not found error when you try to access 
config.py file from one of the other files.

Next: [13.4. Coding the Gui Class](13.4.%20Coding%20the%20GUI%20class.md)<br>
Previous: [13.2. Creating our Project Structure](13.2.%20Creating%20our%20Project%20Structure.md)
