# 13.4. Coding the Exp Class

### Creating an empty GUI class
We are now ready to create our Exp class. But one thing we want to be able to do is test it as we go. And you may 
remember that in `run_experiment.py`, where we create an instance of the Exp class, it is passed an instance of the GUI 
class. So in order to be able to make it run without an error, we need to create that first, even though it makes sense 
to explain it later. So let's start by just creating an empty GUI class. Open the gui.py file, and insert the following 
code:
```python
class GUI:

    def __init__(self):
        pass
```
This code will allow us to run the run_experiment.py script without getting an error, testing it as we go. We can then 
go in and fill in the details of this class in the next section. After adding this, make sure to save your changes to 
the file.

### The Exp class's `__init__` method
Remember that classes need an `__init__()` method if you are going to create instances of it. So open the `exp.py` file
and add the following code:
```python
import csv
import os
import random
import datetime
from config.config import Config

class Exp:

    def __init__(self, the_gui):
        self.the_gui = the_gui  # an instance of the Gui class, which we will use to present info to the screen

        self.participant_id = None  # a unique number for each participant that we will create

        self.instruction_list = None  # a list of strings containing the data in the instruction file
        self.full_stimulus_list = None  # a list of all the possible words/images for the experiment
        self.familiarization_list = None  # the list of words in this participant's familiarization phase
        self.test_list = None  # the list of words in this participant's test list
  
        self.data_list = []
```
At the top of the file, we import all the libraries we are going to use. This includes our config.py library, which we 
import using slightly different syntax, telling it where that file of our is located (inside the config.py file, which 
is inside the config folder).

In our Exp Class, we have our `__init__` method that defines al of the attributes that the class will have.

Next: [13.5. Coding the GUI class](13.5.%20Coding%20the%20GUI%20class.md)<br>
Previous: [13.3. Creating the experiment](13.3.%20Creating%20the%20Experiment.md)