# 6.7 Homework 6

In Homework 2, you are going to make a class-based simulation called "Humans vs. Zombies" using the Turtle module. 
In this simulation, there will be instances of a Zombie class and a Human class. They will have slightly different 
properties:
  - different display icons
  - different movement speeds
  - different functions for choosing which way to move (zombies towards humans, humans away from zombies)
  - Zombies will have an attack() method that they use if in range of a human, turning that human into a zombie


- create a class called `Agent`, with:
  - an `__init__()` method that:
    - is passed the dimensions of the simulation and saves them as an attribute
    - has an input parameter named `start_position` that defaults to `None` if no input is supplied. Save 
      `start_position` as an atribute
    - defines `movement_speed` = 1
    - creates an instance of the `turtle()` class and saves it as an attribute
    - hides the turtle and makes its pen up. 
    - calls the `place_agent()` method defined below
  - a `place_agent()` method that:
    - uses the value of `start_position` to decide where to place the agent
    - if a `start_position` is supplied, then move the turtle to that location and show the turtle
    - if a `start_position` is not supplied, then choose a random starting location within the dimensions of the
      simulation, and move the turtle to that position and show the turtle
  - a `take_turn` method that:
    - calls the `find_move()` and `move()` methods that are defined below
  - a `check_if_legal_move()` method that:
    - is passed a position
    - returns `True` or `False` based on whether that location is in the simulation dimensions
  - a `find_move()` method that:
    - uses a while loop that loops until a legal move is found:
      - pick a random potential new)_position based on randomly moving the turtle a distance of `movement_speed()` in 
        a random direction
      - calls the `check_if_legal_move` method, and passes it the new_position
      - breaks the loop if the move is legal
    - return the new_position
  - `move()` method that:
    - is passed the new_position
    - moves the turtle to new_position


- create a class called `Zombie` derived from the `Agent` class, with:
  - an `__init__()` method that:
    - calls its parent's init function
    - sets the icon of the turtle to a picture of a zombie
    - creates the attribute `attack_range` and sets it to 10
  - defines its own `take_turn()` function that is just like the parent move function, except it also calls the 
  `attack()` method defined below after it moves
  - defines its own `find_move()` function that is like the parent's, except that, instead of moving `movement_speed`
  units in a random direction, the zombie moves up to `movement_speed` units in the direction of the closest human. 
  So you need to figure out which human is the closest... If the closest human is less than movement_speed units away,
  then move to the closest human's exact location. Make sure to check that the zombie's move is legal using the parent's
  `check_if_legal_move` method.
 


- create a class called `Human` derived from the `Agent` class, with:
  - an `__init__()` method that:
    - calls its parent's init function
    - sets the attribute `movement_speed` to 2
    - has a boolean attribute `smart` that is randomly set True or False
    - sets the icon of the turtle to a picture of a Homer Simposon if `smart`==`False`, and Lisa Simposon if 
    `smart`=`True`
  - defines its own `find_move()` function that is like the parent's, except that
    - if `smart`==`False`, moves the human to a random legal location of distance `movement_speed`, just like the parent
    - elif `smart`==`True`, moves a distance of `movement_speed` in the opposite direction of the closest zombie, if 
    that is a legal move, and moves to a random legal location of `movement_speed` distance if it is that was not legal.


- create and call a `main()` function that:
  - has the variable `dimensions` set to (800,600), and sets the turtle window to be that size. If that creates a window
    too big for your screen, you can make it smaller.
  - has the variables `num_humans` and `num_zombies`. set them to 1 for now while you get the program working. Later, 
  change them later to 20 humans and 1 zombie.
  - create a `human_list` and an `agent_list`. Fill each list with the specified number of humans and zombies. When 
    you create each human and zombie, make sure each human spawns in a random location, and the zombie spawns in the
    middle of simulation
  - create a loop that loops while there are still humans. Inside that loop:
    - loop through the list of humans and call their `take_turn()` method
    - loop through the zombies and call their `take_turn()` method


- go back to the `Zombie` class and create an `attack()` method that:
  - checks to see if a human is within `attack_range` distance
  - if a human is in range, delete that human from the `human_list`, and add a new zombie to the `zombie_list` in the 
  exact location.

Next: 7.0. Advanced Topics<br>
Previous: [6.5 Lab 6](6.5.%20Lab%206.md)
