# 9.6. Lab 9

For Lab 9 you are going to be starting with the experiment code I provide here after class on Tuesday:
[List Memory Experiment](../data/list_memory_experiment)

You will need to editing it this code to add functionality. There are five tasks:

1) create a method in the Experiment class called "generate_participant_id" that gets called in the Experiment 
    class's __init__ function. The method should generate a random 9-digit integer and save it as self.participant_id. 
    That's pretty easy. The catch is you have to make sure the number doesn't already exist as one of the data files 
    saved in the data/ folder. You have to generate a random number until you get one that doesn't already exist in 
    that folder. 

2) Create a "record_trial_data" method in the Experiment class that gets called by the Display class after each 
occurrence of a test trial. Pass it all the information it needs so that it can conclude with these two lines:
```python
trial_data_list = [self.exp_condition, self.participant_id, trial_number, stimulus, stimulus_condition, response, correct, rt]
self.data_list.append(trial_data_list)
```
where:
- self.condition is either "text" or "images", depending on which condition file was used
- self.participant_id is the randomly generated 9-digit int
- trial_number is that particular test trial number (1-20)
- stimulus is the string for whatever word or picture was shown on that trial (if it was an image, still use the string 
label)
- stimulus_condition is a 1 if the word/picture was in the familiarization list, and a 0 if it was not
- response is 1 if they pressed "j", and 0 if they pressed "k"
- correct is a 1 if the response was correct, i.e., that stimulus_condition == response, and 0 if they don't match.
- rt is the reaction time that it took the participant to respond (described below)

3) We want to keep track of a participants reaction time on each test trial. This is how long it took a participant 
to respond "j" or "k", starting from the moment that stimulus appeared on the screen. Calculate the reaction time on 
each trial, and pass the value to the"record_trial_data" function so that it can be added to the trial_data_list.

4) Create a "save_data" method in the Experiment class that gets called in the Display class's "run_experiment" method, 
after the "run_test_condition" method is completed. This method should create a file_name in the data/ folder called 
#########.csv, where the numbers are the participant number. Each file should contain a header line and the data for 
all trials. It should look like this, but with 20 lines of trial data:
```csv
exp_condition,participant_id,trial_number,stimulus,stimulus_cond,response,correct, rt
text,454352345,1,canary,1,1,1,1012.231
text,454352345,2,turtle,0,1,0,912.231
text,454352345,3,truck,0,0,1,1032.231
text,454352345,4,strawberry,1,1,1,1112.231
```

5) After completing the code for 1-4 and verifying that everything works as intended, go to the "config.csv" file and 
set the number of familiarization trials and test trials to 20. Then, take the experiment yourself, actually trying!
Remember to get your right hand on the keyboard and be ready to press the "j" and "k" keys as quickly and as accurately
as you can.

When you have finished, make sure that your final, real data file is the only one in the data folder (delete any others
you have made while testing things). Then take the entire "list_memory_exp" directory and zip it, and rename it 
"lastname_firstname_lab9.zip" and submit it as your lab assignment.

Next: 10.0 Data Analysis<br>
Previous: [9.5. Saving the Data](9.5.%20Saving%20the%20Data.md)<br>
