# 1.7 Conditionals

An important part of all programming languages is a conditional statement, a branching where (usually) a comparison 
operator is used to decide if a particular piece of code should be run. In a conditional statement each conditional 
test must end with a colon.
```python
favorite_food = "pizza"

if favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("I am glad you like pizza!")
print("Pizza is my favorite food!")

if favorite_food == "broccoli":
	print("Broccoli is the most dangerous vegetable.")
	print("It tries to warn you with its terrible taste.")

if favorite_food == "apple_pie":
	print("Apple pie is pretty good!")
		print("It is certainly better than broccoli...")

elif favorite_food == "broccoli"):
	print("Ugh, broccoli! That's the deadliest vegetable!")
else:
	print("I don't have strong opinions about that food.")
```

The code that will execute if the conditional is *True* is typically on the following line, indented or spaced to the 
right. Python uses spaces and/or tabs to indicate which code "belongs in" the if statement. This makes Python unusual, 
as most languages use some kind of brackets or parentheses for this.

In the code above, the first print statement ("I am glad you like pizza!") will only execute if "pizza" is stored in 
favorite food, because it is tabbed over. But the second print statement will execute no matter what, because it is 
tabbed fully to the left. Because it is aligned with the if statement, not inside of it, it doesn't "belong in" the 
if statement. In the second if statement, both print statements will execute, because both are tabbed inside the if 
statement. The third if statement is actually an illegal statement, because the two print statements are not tabbed 
the same amount. Python cares about tabs and spaces, and they must be used correctly. 

Conditionals can be complex with multiple alternatives. When an *if* is followed by an *elif*, Python will treat this 
like saying "if the previous condition is not true, then try this condition". An else statement specifies what to do 
if none of the preceding if or elif statements are *True*.
```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
if favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("I am glad you like pizza!")
elif favorite_food == "broccoli"):
	print("Ugh, broccoli! That's the deadliest vegetable!")
else:
	print("I don't have strong opinions about that food.")
```

Note the important way the two examples below are different. In the first example, the first two conditionals are an if 
and elif, and so they are mutually exclusive. Python checks to see if the if is True first, and if it is, exits the 
conditional altogether, without even checking to see if the elif is True. So in this example, only "This is a lucky 
number!" will print. In the second example, there are two if statements, and so they are effectively independent, and 
the else statement belongs to the second if statement. In this case, both "That is a lucky number" and "That is a 
single digit positive number" print.
```python
favorite_number = 7
if favorite_number == 7:
	print("That is a lucky number!")
elif 0 < favorite_number < 10:
	print("That is a single digit positive number ")
else:
	print("I have nothing to say about that number")

if favorite_number == 7:
	print("That is a lucky number!")
if 0 < favorite_number < 10:
	print("That is a single digit positive number ")
else:
	print("I have nothing to say about that number")
```


## Embedded if-else Statements

Conditionals can be embedded inside each other. Just use the correct tabbing.
```python
name = "Jon"
text_response = "My favorite food is pizza and I hate broccoli."

if "pizza" in text_response:
	if name == "Jon":
		print("Jon said something about pizza.")
	else:
		print("Someone not named Jon said something about pizza.")
else:
	if name == "Jon":
		print("Jon did not say anything about pizza.")
	else:
		print("Someone not named Jon did not say anything about pizza.")
```


## Logical Operators and if-else Statements

Conditionals can also use logical operators to combine multiple comparisons.
```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
name = "Jon"

if name == "Andrew" and favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("Andrew's favorite food is pizza")
	# the line above will not execute because both comparisons were not True


if name == "Andrew" or favorite_food == "pizza":
	print("Either the name is Andrew or the favorite food is pizza. Maybe both!")
	# the above statement will execute because at least one of the conditionals
	# is True 
```


## Short-hand if-else Statements

Above we noted that in a Python conditional, the code that will be executed if the condition is True is usually on 
the next line, tabbed over. Python does allow you to do it all one line:
```python
print("Yay pizza!") if favorite_food == "pizza" else print("Boo pizza!")
```
These "short-hand if" statements are legal in python, but they are usually dispreferred as a convention because they 
make the code less readable, and are harder to edit if you end up needing to have multiple lines of code execute within 
the *if* or *else* block.


## The Pass statement

The final thing to note is that if-else statements cannot be empty, they must have code inside them. The following code 
would get an error because nothing is tabbed inside the if:
```python
a = 2
b = 5

if a > b:

print(a)
print(b)
```

However, if for some reason you need to have an empty if statement (or any other kind of statement that requires 
tabbed-over code), you can use the pass statement. The pass statement is just a way of telling python to do nothing 
if that conditional evaluates to True.
```python
a = 2
b = 5

if a > b:
	pass
	
print(a)
print(b)

```

Pass statements are often useful as a way to temporarily get the code to run without an error if you haven't figured 
out what you want to put inside the conditional.

Next: [1.8. Lab 1](1.8.%20Lab%201.md)<br>
Previous: [1.6. Operators](1.6.%20Operators.md)