# 4.0 Functions

The concept of a function is one of the most important in computer programming. A function is a block of code that 
only runs when it is called. Functions often take input data (called arguments) and either execute some action (like 
printing data to the screen or a file) or else return some kind of data back to where the function was called. 

One of the main advantages of using functions in computer code is that, when you have a certain block of code that you 
will need to use many times, you can create a function that is called. Then you can call that code over and over, 
instead of needing to retype and duplicate that code. 

We've already used many functions (such as print() and sum()) and we can use them to make the point. If you have two 
lists of numbers like x = [1, 2, 3, 21, 32] and y = [51, 32, 1], you could write two different for loops that sum them 
up. But you would need to write two different for loops: one iterating over each sequence. To eliminate this need for 
redundant code for such a commonly used operation, python has implemented the sum() function. Functions save a lot of 
time. 

Functions have many other advantages. Using a function instead of re-writing code makes your code much more concise and 
well-organized. It also makes your code much easier to debug. Imagine you have a block of code that you are re-using 
mulitple times, and you discover there is a mistake in it. If that code is in a function, you only have to make the one
change to the function. If instead you have re-written the code in several places, then you need to make the change in 
each one of those places.

