For Homework 4, you are going to analyze and visualize the data we collected in our memory experiment. Here is what you need to do:

0) Create a "figures" folder inside the Experiment folder
1) Get the data
  - Download the data in data/hw4/experiment_data.zip. 
  - Unzip it in the data directory of your Experiment folder from last week. Make sure to delete the zip file when unzipped.
2) In the Experiment's src/ directory, create a file called "analysis.py". Make sure it has a main function 
  and an "if __name__ == " statement and all that, like a good python script. In the file, in addition to main, 
  define the following functions:
3) import_data: which will open the files and create a pandas dataframe out of them. Note that this is a bit different
  than in the lab. There are multiple files, not just one, so you have to deal with that somehow.
4) trim_outliers: takes the full dataframe and removes any trials where the RT is more than 2 seconds long. returns the dataframe back to 
  main get_summarized_means: takes the trimmed dataframe and a "average_over" parameter, where average_over must be either "participant_id", 
  "stimulus", or "trial_number". The function will then create a new dataframe containing the average performance of each subgroup on whatever 
  "average_over" column name it is passed, averaging over the other two variables. In other words:
    - if it is passed "participant_id", then the resulting dataframe columns should be:
      [participant_id, exp_condition, item_cond, mean_response, mean_accuracy, mean_rt].
    - if it is passed "stimulus", then the resulting dataframe columns should be:
      [stimulus, exp_condition, item_cond, mean_response, mean_accuracy, mean_rt].
      - if it is passed "trial_number", then the resulting dataframe columns should be:
      [trial_number, exp_condition, item_cond, mean_response, mean_accuracy, mean_rt].
5) create_participant_histograms: create a single figure with two subplots, one containing a histogram of the participants' mean accuracy, and 
  one containing a histogram of the participants' mean RT. Use the function you created in 4) to get the correct data. But you will need to 
  average it further, since that dataframe will have multiple rows per subject (one for combination of exp_condition and item_cond. Save the 
  figure in the "figures" folder. Don't forget to label your figure, subplots, and axes. call this function from your main function.
6) create_participant_bars: creates a single figure with two subplots, each one a bar plot. The first bar subplot 
  should show the mean accuracy (with standard error bars on each bar) as a function of 2x2 experiment design (words vs. pictures X old items 
  vs. new items). In other words, there should be four bars:
    - one for the average accuracy of "old" trials when the stimulus was a word
    - one for the average accuracy of "old" trials when the stimulus was a picture
    - one for the average accuracy of "new" trials when the stimulus was a word
    - one for the average accuracy of "new" trials when the stimulus was a picture
  the second subplot should be the exact same as the first, except averaging RT instead of accuracy. Use the function you made in #4 to get the 
  correct data. Save the figure in the "figures" folder. Don't forget to label your figure, subplots, and axes. call this function from your main 
  function.
7) create_trial_results_line: creates a single figure with two subplots, each one a line plot. The first line plot should have four lines, 
  showing the average accuracy in the four conditions (same as in #6) but this time broken down by trial number. In other words, you should have 
  four lines with 20 pts each (one for the average accuracy performance on each trial). The second subplot should be the same, but using RT instead 
  of accuracy. Use the function in #4 to get the right data. Don't forget to label your figure, subplots, and axes. call this function from your main 
  function.

When you are done. Zip your experiment directory and rename it lastname_first_name_hw4.zip, and submit it on the course website.
