# 0.2 Code vs. Comments
Now that you have Python installed and have created your first Python program, we can start getting into details.

A Python file can have code and comments. Code is the commands that are run by the Python app. Comments are lines that 
Python ignores, so you can use it to add notes and documentation to your programs. Below is an example of a simple 
Python program with code and comments.

```python
# this is a "Hello World" program.
# It is often the first program we write in a language 
# so that we can make sure everything is working correctly.

print("Hello World!")  # this line has code and comments
```

There are several different ways you can create comments in a Python program. The first way, as shown above, is using 
the # symbol. Python ignores everything on a line that comes after a # symbol. If the symbol is at the beginning of the 
line, as on the first three lines, then the whole line is ignored. You can also put the # on the same line as the code, and 
everything after the # will be ignored. Good programming practice is to use the latter type sparingly, only for lines 
that really need explaining.

One limitation to the # symbol is that it only comments out a single line, and so if you want to write a multi-line 
sequence of comments, like a description of the whole program, then it is annoying to have to put a # over and over. 
You can create a multi-line comment using sets of three single or double quotes.

```Python
'''
	Here is a multi-line comment.
	I can write as many comments as I want without needing more comment symbols.

	I can still use single quotes in the comments, and it stays a comment: '
	Just be careful not to put three in a row unless you are ending the comment
	block.
'''

x = 5
print(x)

"""
	Double quotes work the same way. you can use single quotes ' or double quotes 
	" in the comment block, but again just be careful not to use three of the 
	same type in a row.
"""

```

We will talk more about the proper use of comments later. But using comments is very important because it helps others 
understand your code and help you understand your own code if you haven't looked at it in a while. Another trick to 
remember is that if there is some code that you have written in a program, but you want to temporarily prevent it from 
running while you work on another part, you can just turn it into a comment.

Next: [0.3. Terminal Crash Course](0.3.%20Terminal%20Crash%20Course.md)<br>
Previous: [0.1. Creating & Running Python Programs](0.1.%20Creating%20&%20Running%20Python%20Programs.md)



