# 4.1 Dictionaries

Now let's learn one of the most important and useful data structures in python: dictionaries.

So far all of our data structures have been simple sequences: 
- range: a set of numbers
- list: a mutable (changeable) ordered sequence
- tuple: an immutable (unchangeable) ordered sequence
- set: a mutable unordered sequence without duplicates (you can actually create an immutable set using frozenset() 
   instead of set(), and you can use all the same methods except those that change the set)

Dictionaries are different, in that each element of a dictionary is a pair of things, a key, and a value. Dicionaries
are like a set of unique keys, where each key points to a value. Think of an actual dictionary. It has a set of words,
and each one points to a definition. We can create an actual dictionary with a python dictionary:
```python
word_meaning_dict = {"run": "to move with haste; act quickly",
                     "jump": "to spring clear of the ground or other support by a sudden muscular effort",
                     "talk": "to consult or confer"}
```

To create a dictionary in python, we use squiggly brackets just like a set, except that instead of adding single items, 
we add key-value pairs. Dictionaries can be defined as we did above, with data already in them, or they can be
defined empty (with just the squiggly brackets with nothing inside them. In either case, we can add items to a 
dictionary after defining it like this:
```python
word_meaning_dict = {}
word_meaning_dict["eat"] = "to take into the mouth and swallow for nourishment; chew and swallow (food)."
```

We can then access dictionary items by using the key in the same way we just added one:
```python
print(word_meaning_dict["jump"])
# output would be "to spring clear of the ground or other support by a sudden muscular effort"
```
Sometimes it is useful to think of a dictionary like a list, with an important difference. In a list, the organization
is the order of a list, so we access each member using a number. In a dictionary, the organization is the key. We access
data the same way as with a list (using square brackets), but we provide the key instead of a number.

Dictionaries are mutable, meaning you can change them. The keys of a dictionary must be unique, but the values do not
need to be. You could, for example, have a dictionary of people's names and their birthdays. Every name in the 
dictionary would need to be unique, but multiple people could have the same birthday.

## Data Structures You Can Use in Dictionaries
The values of dictionaries can be any kind of data type: strings, numbers, booleans, lists, tuples, sets, even
other dictionaries. As we will talk about in later sections, data stuctures can get pretty complicated: dictionaries of
dictionaires, lists of dictionaries, dictionaries of lists of sets. Oh my!

The keys of dictionaries can be any immutable data type: string, int, float, tuple, boolean, frozenset. One way to 
think about and make sense of this is that you cannot change a key in a dictionary once you've created it. You can 
replace it, but not change it. In the example below, I can change the value of 'Jon', but I cannot change the key.
If i wanted to do that I would need to delete the entry and create a new entry.
```python
birthday_dict = {'Jon': '11-04', 'Andrew': '10-21', 'Jonathan': '12-03', 'Lin Khern': '10-04'}
birthday_dict['Jon'] = '11-11'

# imagine the name was misspelled
del birthday_dict['Jon'] # deletes the key and value
birthday_dict['John'] = '11-04'
```
This is the reason you cannot use a mutable data type (like a list or a set) as the key of a dictionary. If you 
made the key a list of words, and then added a word to the list, then the key would change, and that's not allowed.
But you can use a tuple of words as a key, and if you want to be able to change the keys, then you just have to use the 
delete and replace method described above.

## Accessing Dictionary Data
In addition to accessing data by using they key inside square brackets, there are other ways you can get at dictionary
data.


### Get a list of a dictionaries keys, or values, or both:
```python
word_meaning_dict = {"run": "to move with haste",
                     "jump": "to spring clear of the ground",
                     "talk": "to consult or confer"}
word_list = word_meaning_dict.keys() 
# ["run", "jump", "talk"]

meaning_list = word_meaning_dict.values()  
# ["to move with haste", "to spring clear of the ground", "to consult or confer"]

word_meaning_list = word_meaning_dict.items()
# .items() gives you a list of tuples
# [("run", "to move with haste"), ("jump", "to spring clear of the ground"), ("talk", "to consult or confer")]
```
<br>

### Use the len() function to see how many entries are in a dictionary:
```python
word_meaning_dict = {"run": "to move with haste",
                     "jump": "to spring clear of the ground",
                     "talk": "to consult or confer"}
print(len(word_meaning_dict))  # output is 3
```
<br>

### Looping Over Dictionaries
Dictionaries are a sequence (of keys), so you can also loop over dictionaries just like a list.
```python
word_meaning_dict = {"run": "to move with haste; act quickly",
                     "jump": "to spring clear of the ground or other support by a sudden muscular effort",
                     "talk": "to consult or confer"}

for word in word_meaning_dict:
    print("{}: {}".format(word, word_meaning_dict[word]))
```
<br>

### Checking to see if a key is in a dictionary
You can combine the previous methods to iterate over keys and values at the same time:
```python
word_meaning_dict = {"run": "to move with haste; act quickly",
                     "jump": "to spring clear of the ground or other support by a sudden muscular effort",
                     "talk": "to consult or confer"}

for word, definition in word_meaning_dict.items():
    print("{}: {}".format(word, definition))
```
Remember that .items() gives you back a list of tuples, so what's really happening here is that you're creating that
list of tuples, and then unpacking the values of that tuple one at a time into the two variables provided in the 
for loop.

Finally, as with lists and sets, you can check to see if a key is in a dictionary:
```python
word_meaning_dict = {"run": "to move with haste; act quickly",
                     "jump": "to spring clear of the ground or other support by a sudden muscular effort",
                     "talk": "to consult or confer"}

word = "run"
if word in word_meaning_dict:
    print("Found the word {}. It's meaning is: {}".format(word, word_meaning_dict[word]))
```

Next: [4.2. Sequence Tricks](4.2.%20Sequence%20Tricks.md)<br>
Previous: [4.0. Sets](4.0.%20Sets.md)
