# 2.0. For Loops

In programming languages, a *for* loop is used to repeatedly execute a sequence of code a specified number of times.
In Python, the way this works is that when you type a *for* loop command, you must also specify some kind of sequence.
The *for* loop uses that sequence to know how many times to loop, executing a number of times that matches the length
of the sequence. In the example below we use the only sequence we've focused on so far, strings, as an example.

```python
favorite_food = "pizza"
for letter in favorite_food:
	print(letter)
```

The syntax for a for loop in python has four elements:
1) *for*
2) a variable (or set of variables) used to hold each element in the sequence ("letter" in the example above)
3) *in*
4) the sequence being iterated over (the string "pizza" in the example above)

Here's another example. Imagine we want to upper case all the vowels in a string. Think through what we need to do
logically. We need to go through each letter in a string one at a time, check to see if it is a vowel, and convert it to
upper case. There are many ways one could accomplish this, but if we want to use a for a loop we can start like this:

```python
hebb_quote = "cells active together will tend to become associated; activity in one facilitates activity in the other."

for letter in hebb_quote:
    pass
```

Remember that pass is a Python command we can use to tell a block of code to do nothing, and it can be useful to fill it
in while we consider what we want to do. So what do we need to do inside the for loop? We need to check each letter to
see if it is a vowel. How can we do that?

Remember that we can use the .find() function to return True or False if something is in a string. So we can create a
string containing all the letters we want to match, and return True if the current letter is in that set.

```python
hebb_quote = "cells active together will tend to become associated; activity in one facilitates activity in the other."
vowels = 'aeiou'

for letter in hebb_quote:
    is_vowel = vowels.find(letter)
    if is_vowel:
        letter = letter.upper()
    print(letter)
```

In the code above, the first line after the for statement searches for the current letter in the *vowels* string, and
stores *True* in *is_vowel* if it finds *letter* in that string, and stores *False* if it doesn't find it. Next, we
have a simple *if* statement that replaces what is stored in *letter* with an upper case version of the same letter if
it is a vowel. Next we print out the letter. As written, this would create output that looked like this:
```txt
c
E
l
l
s

A
c
t
I
v
E
```

But what if we want this?
```txt
cElls ActiIe tOgEthEr wIll tEnd tO bEcOmE AssOcIAtEd; ActIvIty In OnE fAcIlItAtEs ActIviIy In thE OthEr."
```

If we first create an empty string (using two quotes with nothing in them, not even a space), then we can do some simple
string concatenation inside the loop adding each letter at a time to the new string, in either upper or lower case
letter as appropriate:

```python
hebb_quote = "cells active together will tend to become associated; activity in one facilitates activity in the other."
vowels = 'aeiou'
new_hebb_quote = ""  # this is an empty string, since it is just two quotes with nothing between them

for letter in hebb_quote:
    if letter in vowels:
        new_hebb_quote += letter.upper()
    else:
        new_hebb_quote += letter
    print(new_hebb_quote)
```

Remember that we can use + with strings to concatenate, and += will just add the new item to the end of an existing
string.

Next: [2.1. Range and Enumerate](2.1.%20Range%20and%20Enumerate.md)
Previous: [1.8. Lab 1](../CH1/1.8.%20Lab%201.md)