# 2.9 Homework 1

In Homework 1, you are going to write a program that does some simple data analysis, and makes you use your newfound 
knowledge of lists, for loops, and other basic Python functions. 

The program is an analysis of some simulated data from a cognitive psychology experiment. In the experiment, five 
participants were presented a sequence of words on a computer screen, with the instructions that they should read the 
word aloud as fast as they can. The amount of time it took the participant to begin reading the word (what is called 
the "voice onset time", measured in milliseconds) was recorded for each word.

There are two lists below that show the list of words (word_list) and the ID number of each participant 
(participant_id_list). In addition, the data is stored  in a variable called voice_onset_time_list. This variable 
is a list of lists:
- the outer list is a list of eight lists, one for each word. The order of these lists are the same as the order of 
the words in word_list.
- each inner list contains the five reaction times  for a single word (one for each participant). The order of 
participants in each list matches the participant order in the participant_id_list.

Finally, word belongs to two different experimental conditions
```python
word_list = ['dog', 'eagle', 'shoe', 'car', 'vole', 'heron', 'scarf', 'van']
participant_id_list = [101, 105, 102, 104, 103]

reading_time_matrix = [[477, 667, 425, 530, 565],
					   [396, 627, 452, 635,	532],
					   [661, 661, 398, 676,	368],
					   [444, 648, 533, 756,	429],
					   [759, 571, 467, 656,	559],
					   [569, 690, 442, 919,	607],
					   [761, 733, 540, 793,	681],
					   [859, 811, 546, 542,	516]]

frequency_condition_list = ["frequent", "frequent", "frequent", "frequent", "infrequent", "infrequent", "infrequent", 
                            "infrequent"]
regularity_condition_list = ["regular", "irregular", "regular", "irregular", "regular", "irregular", "irregular", 
                             "regular"]
```

To complete the assignment, create a new file called "lastname_firstname_hw1.py", and paste in the code above at the 
top. Then write code to complete the following three objectives:

1) print to the Terminal a "Word Report" that shows the mean reaction time for each word.
	- To do this, create a list called word_mean_list, compute each word's mean, and add it to the list. Compute the 
	means in your code, without using any of python's add on libraries (like statistics or numpy, we will learn to 
	this later)
	- Format your output to look like the table below
		- Each word should be on a row, with the word and the mean in two nicely formatted columns.
		- Show each means to two decimal points of precision.
		- The means should all be perfectly aligned like below, not in a different place depending on the length of 
		the word
```txt
Word Report
Word     Mean RT (ms)
dog      532.80
eagle    528.40
shoe     552.80
car      562.00
vole     602.40
heron    645.40
scarf    701.60
van      654.80
```

2) print to the Terminal a "Participant Report" that shows the mean reaction time for each participant. It should be 
just like the Word Report, but with five rows (one for each participant ID and their mean).
```txt
Participant Report
Participant     Mean RT (ms)
101             615.75
105             676.00
102             475.38
104             688.38
103             532.12
```

3) print out a "Condition Reports", with means for each of the sets of conditions. It should look like this:

```txt
Condition Report
Condition               Mean RT (ms)
Frequent                544.00
Infrequent              651.05

Regular                 585.70
Irregular               609.35

Frequent & Regular      542.80
Frequent & Irregular    545.20
Infrequent & Regular    628.60
Infrequent & Irregular  673.50
```

Don't forget to comment your code! You don't need to comment and explain each line, but make sure to have a comment 
for every major section explaining what that section is doing

Previous: [3.0 Terminal Input and Output](../CH3/3.0.%20Terminal%20Input%20and%20Output.md) <br>
Previous: [2.8. Lab 2](2.8.%20Lab%202.md)
