# 7.1. Classes Attributes

As we have discussed, classes can have both data (which in classes we call "attributes") and functions (which in classes
we call "methods"). Here we're going to talk about class attributes.

There are two ways you can add attributes to a class, by adding them to the instance or by adding them to the class
definition itself. Let's start by adding attributes to a class instance.
```python
class Human:
    pass

jon = Human()
print(jon)

jon.name = 'Jon'
jon.age = 44

print(jon)
```
Which generates the output
```text
<__main__.Human object at 0x101309b10>
<__main__.Human object at 0x101309b10>
```
As you can see from the two print statements, the object itself doesn't noticeably change when you add an attribute.
That is because the attributes of a class are stored in a dictionary inside the class, which you can access:
```python
print(jon.__dict__)
```
Which results in:
```text
{'name': 'Jon', 'age': 44}
```

So you COULD access the specific attributes of a class instance via this dictionary:
```python
print(jon.__dict__['age'])
```

But because the whole point of classes is to make accessing its attributes simple, python gives us a simpler way:
print(jon.age)

The period after the class instance's name is a way to signify that we are accessing a member attribute of the
class. Python creates a shortcut to all the keys in the attribute dictionary, so we can access them more directly.

Like I said, there are two ways to add an attribute to a class, and the way we just did it is the less preferred 
option. This is because, while it adds the attribute to that instance of a class, it doesn't add it permanently to the
class. Consider the following example:
```python
jon.has_brain = True
print("The 'has_brain' attribute has been added to Jon")
print(jon.__dict__)

andrew = Human()
print(andrew.has_brain) 
```
The last line will generate an error. The attribute has_brain was only added to jon, not to Human, and so new attributes
created will not have the attribute.

## Declaring Attributes in Class Definition

When we want to define an attribute as a permanent attribute of the class, the easiest way to do it  is when we 
define the class in the first place:

```python
class Human:
    def __init__(self):
        self.has_brain = True
        self.has_heart = True
        self.name = None
        self.age = None
```
We can use the init function to define our attributes inside the function. It is commonplace and good 
practice to define all variables a class will ever have in its initialization function, so that people who look at your 
code can easily see what attributes a class can have. 'has_brain' is an attribute of all humans, and so is set to 'True' 
by default. The other attributes (name, age, and birthplace) don't get set to anything right away.  We can just use 
'None' as a convenient placeholder.

So now:
```python
jon = Human()

print("Jon has a brain:", jon.has_brain)
print("Jon has a heart:", jon.has_heart)
print("Jon's age:", jon.age)
```
The first two lines will print True, and the last line will print None, because that is what was assigned to these 
attributes in the init function, and they haven't been changed to anything else yet.

As we have already described, you can also pass other variables into a class's init function, if you want to set 
variable values immediately when a class member is created. Just like any other function, you have to define them 
as both an argument (in the function definition), and as a parameter (when you call the function, in this case, when 
you are creating an instance of the class.

## Adding Attributes After Class Definition

We can, of course, add attributes after a class is defined, as we did above:
```python
class Human:
    def __init__(self):
        self.has_brain = True
        self.has_heart = True
        self.name = None
        self.age = None

jon = Human()

jon.num_fingers = 10
Human.num_toes = 10
```
In the last two lines, we add attributes to a class after it is defined. The first one (num_fingers) only adds the 
attribute to the instance jon. The second one (number of toes) adds it to the class definition itself. So all existing 
and future class instances will have that attribute and that value.


Next: [7.2. Class Methods](7.2.%20Class%20Methods.md)<br>
Previous: [7.0. Classes and OOP](7.0.%20Classes%20and%20OOP.md)
