# 7.2. Classes Methods

In addition to attribute variables, classes can also have functions, which are called methods when they are inside of a 
class. We have already introduced a kind of class function, init.
```python
class Human:
    def __init__(self, name, age):
        self.has_brain = True
        self.has_heart = True
        self.name = name
        self.age = age
```

We can also create other functions for our class. We COULD do it in a non, object-oriented way, like below.

```python
def celebrate_birthday(human):
    human.age += 1
    print("\nHappy Birthday to {}! {} is now {} years old!".format(human.name, human.name, human.age))

    jon = Human("jon", 44, "Male")
    celebrate_birthday(jon)
```
But the object-oriented way is to make that function a member of the class. When we make a function a member of
a class, we call it a class 'method'. Thus, classes can have two kinds of things: attributes (their stored data) and
methods (their functions).

Defining a class method is simple, we just define it inside the class instead of outside of it."""
```python
class Human:
    def __init__(self, name, age, sex):
        self.has_brain = True
        self.has_heart = True
        self.name = name
        self.age = age
        self.sex = sex

    def celebrate_birthday(self):
        self.age += 1
        print("\nHappy Birthday to {}! {} is now {} years old!".format(self.name, self.name, self.age))
```

You will notice a few things above:
1) we have to pass 'self' into this function so that it knows that all the attributes and methods of the 
    object are local variables that this function can use.
2) when we use the object's attributes inside the 'celebrate_birthday' function, you have to have 'self' 
    in front of them there as well. This is how it knows that you are talking about the variable that is an 
    attribute of the class, and not some local variable that you have created inside this method. In fact, if you 
    try to access a variable without self, it will generate an error. Likewise, if you create a variable inside a class 
    method without using self, it will just be a local variable that will disappear when the function has completed.

You access methods of a class the same way you access its attributes, with the class instance's name,
followed by a period, followed by the method name.

```python
jon = Human("jon", 41, "Male")
jon.celebrate_birthday()
```

Next: [7.3. Class Methods](7.3.%20Class%20Inheritance.md)<br>
Previous: [7.1 Class Attributes](7.1.%20Class%20Attributes.md)
